Springer will include the preface, table of contents, and one sample
chapter on our web site. Which chapter should we use?

The back-cover copy consists of 2-4 paragraphs and is written for a
technical audience so you can assume some knowledge of the area. The
first paragraph or two states what is important about the book, who
would find it useful, and the prerequisites. The first sentence should
get the reader's attention. Don't just repeat the contents; explain what
the benefits are of reading your book. If this is a new edition, how
does it differ from the previous one? Include a last paragraph with
information about the authors/editors, such as you are Professor of xx
at the University of xx, officer of these associations, editor of these
journals, author of these books, winner of these prizes, and any other
impressive facts. The copy should not exceed 300 words. The preface
should be written in the first person (I or we) but write the back-cover
copy in the third person (the author or this book...). Avoid excessive
use of the passive voice.

We also need a briefer and non-technical description for our bookstore
sales reps and bookstore/library buyers with minimal background. How
would you explain to these buyers what your book is about and why it is
important?

Please supply three unique selling points that we can present in
bulleted form on our web page. These should be compelling reasons why a
customer should buy your book. If possible, each point should explain
the benefit to the reader, e.g., "full-color figures allow more accurate
data analysis."

Please supply a maximum of five key words/phrases for your book. We will
make them available to search engines such as Springer.com and
Amazon.com.

What is the main competing book and what advantages does your book
offer?

Your book will be advertised to the main statistical societies. Please
list any other societies that are an important market for your book.

What supplementary material will be available? If you have exercise
sets, will you be able to supply answers/solutions/hints for instructors
that require the book for a course?


We want to promote your book in various ways, and welcome any
suggestions from you. You can mention your new book on your homepage.
Are there any e-mail lists that you can used to announce your book? We
can supply a .jpg file of your book cover before your book is published.
You can add information about the book, like the full contents, data
sets, errata lists, color figures, computer code, and related research
work. You can link your page to the Springer online catalog page
featuring your book. Send us your URL so we can link to it. You can also
send information to relevant newsgroups.

YOUR CHOICE FOR BOOKSTORE LOCATION IS:
Statistics

MARKETING CATEGORIES

Statistics and Computing/Statistical Programs

Mathematics: Visualization
Computer Science: Computer Graphics
